iambic pentameter
In these deep solitudes and awful cells, 
Where heav'nly-pensive contemplation dwells, 
And ever-musing melancholy reigns; 
What means this tumult in a vestal's veins? 
Why rove my thoughts beyond this last retreat? 
Why feels my heart its long-forgotten heat? 
Yet, yet I love!—From Abelard it came, 
And Eloisa yet must kiss the name. 

Dear fatal name! rest ever unreveal'd, 
Nor pass these lips in holy silence seal'd. 
Hide it, my heart, within that close disguise, 
Where mix'd with God's, his lov'd idea lies: 
O write it not, my hand—the name appears 
Already written—wash it out, my tears! 
In vain lost Eloisa weeps and prays, 
Her heart still dictates, and her hand obeys. 

Relentless walls! whose darksome round contains 
Repentant sighs, and voluntary pains: 
Ye rugged rocks! which holy knees have worn; 
Ye grots and caverns shagg'd with horrid thorn! 
Shrines! where their vigils pale-ey'd virgins keep, 
And pitying saints, whose statues learn to weep! 
Though cold like you, unmov'd, and silent grown, 
I have not yet forgot myself to stone. 
All is not Heav'n's while Abelard has part, 
Still rebel nature holds out half my heart; 
Nor pray'rs nor fasts its stubborn pulse restrain, 
Nor tears, for ages, taught to flow in vain. 

Soon as thy letters trembling I unclose, 
That well-known name awakens all my woes. 
Oh name for ever sad! for ever dear! 
Still breath'd in sighs, still usher'd with a tear. 
I tremble too, where'er my own I find, 
Some dire misfortune follows close behind. 
Line after line my gushing eyes o'erflow, 
Led through a sad variety of woe: 
Now warm in love, now with'ring in thy bloom, 
Lost in a convent's solitary gloom! 
There stern religion quench'd th' unwilling flame, 
There died the best of passions, love and fame. 

Yet write, oh write me all, that I may join 
Griefs to thy griefs, and echo sighs to thine. 
Nor foes nor fortune take this pow'r away; 
And is my Abelard less kind than they? 
Tears still are mine, and those I need not spare, 
Love but demands what else were shed in pray'r; 
No happier task these faded eyes pursue; 
To read and weep is all they now can do. 

Then share thy pain, allow that sad relief; 
Ah, more than share it! give me all thy grief. 
Heav'n first taught letters for some wretch's aid, 
Some banish'd lover, or some captive maid; 
They live, they speak, they breathe what love inspires, 
Warm from the soul, and faithful to its fires, 
The virgin's wish without her fears impart, 
Excuse the blush, and pour out all the heart, 
Speed the soft intercourse from soul to soul, 
And waft a sigh from Indus to the Pole. 

Thou know'st how guiltless first I met thy flame, 
When Love approach'd me under Friendship's name; 
My fancy form'd thee of angelic kind, 
Some emanation of th' all-beauteous Mind. 
Those smiling eyes, attemp'ring ev'ry day, 
Shone sweetly lambent with celestial day. 
Guiltless I gaz'd; heav'n listen'd while you sung; 
And truths divine came mended from that tongue. 
From lips like those what precept fail'd to move? 
Too soon they taught me 'twas no sin to love. 
Back through the paths of pleasing sense I ran, 
Nor wish'd an Angel whom I lov'd a Man. 
Dim and remote the joys of saints I see; 
Nor envy them, that heav'n I lose for thee. 

How oft, when press'd to marriage, have I said, 
Curse on all laws but those which love has made! 
Love, free as air, at sight of human ties, 
Spreads his light wings, and in a moment flies, 
Let wealth, let honour, wait the wedded dame, 
August her deed, and sacred be her fame; 
Before true passion all those views remove, 
Fame, wealth, and honour! what are you to Love? 
The jealous God, when we profane his fires, 
Those restless passions in revenge inspires; 
And bids them make mistaken mortals groan, 
Who seek in love for aught but love alone. 
Should at my feet the world's great master fall, 
Himself, his throne, his world, I'd scorn 'em all: 
Not Caesar's empress would I deign to prove; 
No, make me mistress to the man I love; 
If there be yet another name more free, 
More fond than mistress, make me that to thee! 
Oh happy state! when souls each other draw, 
When love is liberty, and nature, law: 
All then is full, possessing, and possess'd, 
No craving void left aching in the breast: 
Ev'n thought meets thought, ere from the lips it part, 
And each warm wish springs mutual from the heart. 
This sure is bliss (if bliss on earth there be) 
And once the lot of Abelard and me. 

Alas, how chang'd! what sudden horrors rise! 
A naked lover bound and bleeding lies! 
Where, where was Eloise? her voice, her hand, 
Her poniard, had oppos'd the dire command. 
Barbarian, stay! that bloody stroke restrain; 
The crime was common, common be the pain. 
I can no more; by shame, by rage suppress'd, 
Let tears, and burning blushes speak the rest. 

Canst thou forget that sad, that solemn day, 
When victims at yon altar's foot we lay? 
Canst thou forget what tears that moment fell, 
When, warm in youth, I bade the world farewell? 
As with cold lips I kiss'd the sacred veil, 
The shrines all trembl'd, and the lamps grew pale: 
Heav'n scarce believ'd the conquest it survey'd, 
And saints with wonder heard the vows I made. 
Yet then, to those dread altars as I drew, 
Not on the Cross my eyes were fix'd, but you: 
Not grace, or zeal, love only was my call, 
And if I lose thy love, I lose my all. 
Come! with thy looks, thy words, relieve my woe; 
Those still at least are left thee to bestow. 
Still on that breast enamour'd let me lie, 
Still drink delicious poison from thy eye, 
Pant on thy lip, and to thy heart be press'd; 
Give all thou canst—and let me dream the rest. 
Ah no! instruct me other joys to prize, 
With other beauties charm my partial eyes, 
Full in my view set all the bright abode, 
And make my soul quit Abelard for God. 

Ah, think at least thy flock deserves thy care, 
Plants of thy hand, and children of thy pray'r. 
From the false world in early youth they fled, 
By thee to mountains, wilds, and deserts led. 
You rais'd these hallow'd walls; the desert smil'd, 
And Paradise was open'd in the wild. 
No weeping orphan saw his father's stores 
Our shrines irradiate, or emblaze the floors; 
No silver saints, by dying misers giv'n, 
Here brib'd the rage of ill-requited heav'n: 
But such plain roofs as piety could raise, 
And only vocal with the Maker's praise. 
In these lone walls (their days eternal bound) 
These moss-grown domes with spiry turrets crown'd, 
Where awful arches make a noonday night, 
And the dim windows shed a solemn light; 
Thy eyes diffus'd a reconciling ray, 
And gleams of glory brighten'd all the day. 
But now no face divine contentment wears, 
'Tis all blank sadness, or continual tears. 
See how the force of others' pray'rs I try, 
(O pious fraud of am'rous charity!) 
But why should I on others' pray'rs depend? 
Come thou, my father, brother, husband, friend! 
Ah let thy handmaid, sister, daughter move, 
And all those tender names in one, thy love! 
The darksome pines that o'er yon rocks reclin'd 
Wave high, and murmur to the hollow wind, 
The wand'ring streams that shine between the hills, 
The grots that echo to the tinkling rills, 
The dying gales that pant upon the trees, 
The lakes that quiver to the curling breeze; 
No more these scenes my meditation aid, 
Or lull to rest the visionary maid. 
But o'er the twilight groves and dusky caves, 
Long-sounding aisles, and intermingled graves, 
Black Melancholy sits, and round her throws 
A death-like silence, and a dread repose: 
Her gloomy presence saddens all the scene, 
Shades ev'ry flow'r, and darkens ev'ry green, 
Deepens the murmur of the falling floods, 
And breathes a browner horror on the woods. 

Yet here for ever, ever must I stay; 
Sad proof how well a lover can obey! 
Death, only death, can break the lasting chain; 
And here, ev'n then, shall my cold dust remain, 
Here all its frailties, all its flames resign, 
And wait till 'tis no sin to mix with thine. 

Ah wretch! believ'd the spouse of God in vain, 
Confess'd within the slave of love and man. 
Assist me, Heav'n! but whence arose that pray'r? 
Sprung it from piety, or from despair? 
Ev'n here, where frozen chastity retires, 
Love finds an altar for forbidden fires. 
I ought to grieve, but cannot what I ought; 
I mourn the lover, not lament the fault; 
I view my crime, but kindle at the view, 
Repent old pleasures, and solicit new; 
Now turn'd to Heav'n, I weep my past offence, 
Now think of thee, and curse my innocence. 
Of all affliction taught a lover yet, 
'Tis sure the hardest science to forget! 
How shall I lose the sin, yet keep the sense, 
And love th' offender, yet detest th' offence? 
How the dear object from the crime remove, 
Or how distinguish penitence from love? 
Unequal task! a passion to resign, 
For hearts so touch'd, so pierc'd, so lost as mine. 
Ere such a soul regains its peaceful state, 
How often must it love, how often hate! 
How often hope, despair, resent, regret, 
Conceal, disdain—do all things but forget. 
But let Heav'n seize it, all at once 'tis fir'd; 
Not touch'd, but rapt; not waken'd, but inspir'd! 
Oh come! oh teach me nature to subdue, 
Renounce my love, my life, myself—and you. 
Fill my fond heart with God alone, for he 
Alone can rival, can succeed to thee. 

How happy is the blameless vestal's lot! 
The world forgetting, by the world forgot. 
Eternal sunshine of the spotless mind! 
Each pray'r accepted, and each wish resign'd; 
Labour and rest, that equal periods keep; 
"Obedient slumbers that can wake and weep;" 
Desires compos'd, affections ever ev'n, 
Tears that delight, and sighs that waft to Heav'n. 
Grace shines around her with serenest beams, 
And whisp'ring angels prompt her golden dreams. 
For her th' unfading rose of Eden blooms, 
And wings of seraphs shed divine perfumes, 
For her the Spouse prepares the bridal ring, 
For her white virgins hymeneals sing, 
To sounds of heav'nly harps she dies away, 
And melts in visions of eternal day. 

Far other dreams my erring soul employ, 
Far other raptures, of unholy joy: 
When at the close of each sad, sorrowing day, 
Fancy restores what vengeance snatch'd away, 
Then conscience sleeps, and leaving nature free, 
All my loose soul unbounded springs to thee. 
Oh curs'd, dear horrors of all-conscious night! 
How glowing guilt exalts the keen delight! 
Provoking Daemons all restraint remove, 
And stir within me every source of love. 
I hear thee, view thee, gaze o'er all thy charms, 
And round thy phantom glue my clasping arms. 
I wake—no more I hear, no more I view, 
The phantom flies me, as unkind as you. 
I call aloud; it hears not what I say; 
I stretch my empty arms; it glides away. 
To dream once more I close my willing eyes; 
Ye soft illusions, dear deceits, arise! 
Alas, no more—methinks we wand'ring go 
Through dreary wastes, and weep each other's woe, 
Where round some mould'ring tower pale ivy creeps, 
And low-brow'd rocks hang nodding o'er the deeps. 
Sudden you mount, you beckon from the skies; 
Clouds interpose, waves roar, and winds arise. 
I shriek, start up, the same sad prospect find, 
And wake to all the griefs I left behind. 

For thee the fates, severely kind, ordain 
A cool suspense from pleasure and from pain; 
Thy life a long, dead calm of fix'd repose; 
No pulse that riots, and no blood that glows. 
Still as the sea, ere winds were taught to blow, 
Or moving spirit bade the waters flow; 
Soft as the slumbers of a saint forgiv'n, 
And mild as opening gleams of promis'd heav'n. 

Come, Abelard! for what hast thou to dread? 
The torch of Venus burns not for the dead. 
Nature stands check'd; Religion disapproves; 
Ev'n thou art cold—yet Eloisa loves. 
Ah hopeless, lasting flames! like those that burn 
To light the dead, and warm th' unfruitful urn. 

What scenes appear where'er I turn my view? 
The dear ideas, where I fly, pursue, 
Rise in the grove, before the altar rise, 
Stain all my soul, and wanton in my eyes. 
I waste the matin lamp in sighs for thee, 
Thy image steals between my God and me, 
Thy voice I seem in ev'ry hymn to hear, 
With ev'ry bead I drop too soft a tear. 
When from the censer clouds of fragrance roll, 
And swelling organs lift the rising soul, 
One thought of thee puts all the pomp to flight, 
Priests, tapers, temples, swim before my sight: 
In seas of flame my plunging soul is drown'd, 
While altars blaze, and angels tremble round. 

While prostrate here in humble grief I lie, 
Kind, virtuous drops just gath'ring in my eye, 
While praying, trembling, in the dust I roll, 
And dawning grace is op'ning on my soul: 
Come, if thou dar'st, all charming as thou art! 
Oppose thyself to Heav'n; dispute my heart; 
Come, with one glance of those deluding eyes 
Blot out each bright idea of the skies; 
Take back that grace, those sorrows, and those tears; 
Take back my fruitless penitence and pray'rs; 
Snatch me, just mounting, from the blest abode; 
Assist the fiends, and tear me from my God! 

No, fly me, fly me, far as pole from pole; 
Rise Alps between us! and whole oceans roll! 
Ah, come not, write not, think not once of me, 
Nor share one pang of all I felt for thee. 
Thy oaths I quit, thy memory resign; 
Forget, renounce me, hate whate'er was mine. 
Fair eyes, and tempting looks (which yet I view!) 
Long lov'd, ador'd ideas, all adieu! 
Oh Grace serene! oh virtue heav'nly fair! 
Divine oblivion of low-thoughted care! 
Fresh blooming hope, gay daughter of the sky! 
And faith, our early immortality! 
Enter, each mild, each amicable guest; 
Receive, and wrap me in eternal rest! 

See in her cell sad Eloisa spread, 
Propp'd on some tomb, a neighbour of the dead. 
In each low wind methinks a spirit calls, 
And more than echoes talk along the walls. 
Here, as I watch'd the dying lamps around, 
From yonder shrine I heard a hollow sound. 
"Come, sister, come!" (it said, or seem'd to say) 
"Thy place is here, sad sister, come away! 
Once like thyself, I trembled, wept, and pray'd, 
Love's victim then, though now a sainted maid: 
But all is calm in this eternal sleep; 
Here grief forgets to groan, and love to weep, 
Ev'n superstition loses ev'ry fear: 
For God, not man, absolves our frailties here." 

I come, I come! prepare your roseate bow'rs, 
Celestial palms, and ever-blooming flow'rs. 
Thither, where sinners may have rest, I go, 
Where flames refin'd in breasts seraphic glow: 
Thou, Abelard! the last sad office pay, 
And smooth my passage to the realms of day; 
See my lips tremble, and my eye-balls roll, 
Suck my last breath, and catch my flying soul! 
Ah no—in sacred vestments may'st thou stand, 
The hallow'd taper trembling in thy hand, 
Present the cross before my lifted eye, 
Teach me at once, and learn of me to die. 
Ah then, thy once-lov'd Eloisa see! 
It will be then no crime to gaze on me. 
See from my cheek the transient roses fly! 
See the last sparkle languish in my eye! 
Till ev'ry motion, pulse, and breath be o'er; 
And ev'n my Abelard be lov'd no more. 
O Death all-eloquent! you only prove 
What dust we dote on, when 'tis man we love. 

Then too, when fate shall thy fair frame destroy, 
(That cause of all my guilt, and all my joy) 
In trance ecstatic may thy pangs be drown'd, 
Bright clouds descend, and angels watch thee round, 
From op'ning skies may streaming glories shine, 
And saints embrace thee with a love like mine. 

May one kind grave unite each hapless name, 
And graft my love immortal on thy fame! 
Then, ages hence, when all my woes are o'er, 
When this rebellious heart shall beat no more; 
If ever chance two wand'ring lovers brings 
To Paraclete's white walls and silver springs, 
O'er the pale marble shall they join their heads, 
And drink the falling tears each other sheds; 
Then sadly say, with mutual pity mov'd, 
"Oh may we never love as these have lov'd!" 

From the full choir when loud Hosannas rise, 
And swell the pomp of dreadful sacrifice, 
Amid that scene if some relenting eye 
Glance on the stone where our cold relics lie, 
Devotion's self shall steal a thought from Heav'n, 
One human tear shall drop and be forgiv'n. 
And sure, if fate some future bard shall join 
In sad similitude of griefs to mine, 
Condemn'd whole years in absence to deplore, 
And image charms he must behold no more; 
Such if there be, who loves so long, so well; 
Let him our sad, our tender story tell; 
The well-sung woes will soothe my pensive ghost; 
He best can paint 'em, who shall feel 'em most. 


iambic pentameter
It little profits that an idle king, 
By this still hearth, among these barren crags, 
Match'd with an aged wife, I mete and dole 
Unequal laws unto a savage race, 
That hoard, and sleep, and feed, and know not me. 
I cannot rest from travel: I will drink 
Life to the lees: All times I have enjoy'd 
Greatly, have suffer'd greatly, both with those 
That loved me, and alone, on shore, and when 
Thro' scudding drifts the rainy Hyades 
Vext the dim sea: I am become a name; 
For always roaming with a hungry heart 
Much have I seen and known; cities of men 
And manners, climates, councils, governments, 
Myself not least, but honour'd of them all; 
And drunk delight of battle with my peers, 
Far on the ringing plains of windy Troy. 
I am a part of all that I have met; 
Yet all experience is an arch wherethro' 
Gleams that untravell'd world whose margin fades 
For ever and forever when I move. 
How dull it is to pause, to make an end, 
To rust unburnish'd, not to shine in use! 
As tho' to breathe were life! Life piled on life 
Were all too little, and of one to me 
Little remains: but every hour is saved 
From that eternal silence, something more, 
A bringer of new things; and vile it were 
For some three suns to store and hoard myself, 
And this gray spirit yearning in desire 
To follow knowledge like a sinking star, 
Beyond the utmost bound of human thought. 

         This is my son, mine own Telemachus, 
To whom I leave the sceptre and the isle,— 
Well-loved of me, discerning to fulfil 
This labour, by slow prudence to make mild 
A rugged people, and thro' soft degrees 
Subdue them to the useful and the good. 
Most blameless is he, centred in the sphere 
Of common duties, decent not to fail 
In offices of tenderness, and pay 
Meet adoration to my household gods, 
When I am gone. He works his work, I mine. 

         There lies the port; the vessel puffs her sail: 
There gloom the dark, broad seas. My mariners, 
Souls that have toil'd, and wrought, and thought with me— 
That ever with a frolic welcome took 
The thunder and the sunshine, and opposed 
Free hearts, free foreheads—you and I are old; 
Old age hath yet his honour and his toil; 
Death closes all: but something ere the end, 
Some work of noble note, may yet be done, 
Not unbecoming men that strove with Gods. 
The lights begin to twinkle from the rocks: 
The long day wanes: the slow moon climbs: the deep 
Moans round with many voices. Come, my friends, 
'T is not too late to seek a newer world. 
Push off, and sitting well in order smite 
The sounding furrows; for my purpose holds 
To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths 
Of all the western stars, until I die. 
It may be that the gulfs will wash us down: 
It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles, 
And see the great Achilles, whom we knew. 
Tho' much is taken, much abides; and tho' 
We are not now that strength which in old days 
Moved earth and heaven, that which we are, we are; 
One equal temper of heroic hearts, 
Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will 
To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.


iambic pentameter
When our two sould stand up erect and strong, 
Face to face, silent, drawing nigh and nighter,
Until the lengthening wings break into frie
At either curved point, what bitter wrong
Can the earth do to us, that we should not long
Be here contented? Think. In mounting hight,
The angels would press on us and aspire
To drop some golden orb of perfect song
Into our deep, dear silence. Let us stay 
Rather on earth, Beloved, where the unfit
Contrarious moods of men recoil away
And isolate pure spirits, and permit
A place to stand and love in for a day,
With darkness and the death-hour rounding it.


iambic pentameter
Long have I long’d to see my love againe, 
Still have I wisht, but never could obtaine it; 
Rather than all the world (if I might gaine it) 
Would I desire my love’s sweet precious gaine. 
Yet in my soule I see him everie day, 
See him, and see his still sterne countenaunce, 
But (ah) what is of long continuance, 
Where majestie and beautie beares the sway? 
Sometimes, when I imagine that I see him, 
(As love is full of foolish fantasies) 
Weening to kisse his lips, as my love’s fees, 
I feele but aire: nothing but aire to bee him. 
Thus with Ixion, kisse I clouds in vaine: 
Thus with Ixion, feele I endles paine.


dactylic tetrameter
Just for a handful of silver he left us, 
Just for a riband to stick in his coat— 
Found the one gift of which fortune bereft us, 
Lost all the others she lets us devote; 
They, with the gold to give, doled him out silver, 
So much was theirs who so little allowed: 
How all our copper had gone for his service! 
Rags—were they purple, his heart had been proud! 
We that had loved him so, followed him, honoured him, 
Lived in his mild and magnificent eye, 
Learned his great language, caught his clear accents, 
Made him our pattern to live and to die! 
Shakespeare was of us, Milton was for us, 
Burns, Shelley, were with us,—they watch from their graves! 
He alone breaks from the van and the freemen, 
—He alone sinks to the rear and the slaves! 

We shall march prospering,—not thro' his presence; 
Songs may inspirit us,—not from his lyre; 
Deeds will be done,—while he boasts his quiescence, 
Still bidding crouch whom the rest bade aspire: 
Blot out his name, then, record one lost soul more, 
One task more declined, one more footpath untrod, 
One more devils'-triumph and sorrow for angels, 
One wrong more to man, one more insult to God! 
Life's night begins: let him never come back to us! 
There would be doubt, hesitation and pain, 
Forced praise on our part—the glimmer of twilight, 
Never glad confident morning again! 
Best fight on well, for we taught him—strike gallantly, 
Menace our heart ere we master his own; 
Then let him receive the new knowledge and wait us, 
Pardoned in heaven, the first by the throne! 


iambic pentameter
Oh, good gigantic smile o’ the brown old earth, 
This autumn morning! How he sets his bones 
To bask i’ the sun, and thrusts out knees and feet 
For the ripple to run over in its mirth; 
Listening the while, where on the heap of stones 
The white breast of the sea-lark twitters sweet. 

That is the doctrine, simple, ancient, true; 
Such is life’s trial, as old earth smiles and knows. 
If you loved only what were worth your love, 
Love were clear gain, and wholly well for you: 
Make the low nature better by your throes! 
Give earth yourself, go up for gain above!


anapestic tetrameter
The Assyrian came down like the wolf on the fold,
And his cohorts were gleaming in purple and gold;
And the sheen of their spears was like stars on the sea,
When the blue wave rolls nightly on deep Galilee.

   Like the leaves of the forest when Summer is green,
That host with their banners at sunset were seen:
Like the leaves of the forest when Autumn hath blown,
That host on the morrow lay withered and strown.

   For the Angel of Death spread his wings on the blast,
And breathed in the face of the foe as he passed;
And the eyes of the sleepers waxed deadly and chill,
And their hearts but once heaved, and for ever grew still!

   And there lay the steed with his nostril all wide,
But through it there rolled not the breath of his pride;
And the foam of his gasping lay white on the turf,
And cold as the spray of the rock-beating surf.

   And there lay the rider distorted and pale,
With the dew on his brow, and the rust on his mail:
And the tents were all silent, the banners alone,
The lances unlifted, the trumpet unblown.

   And the widows of Ashur are loud in their wail,
And the idols are broke in the temple of Baal;
And the might of the Gentile, unsmote by the sword,
Hath melted like snow in the glance of the Lord!


iambic tetrameter
Where the remote Bermudas ride 
In th’ ocean’s bosom unespy’d, 
From a small boat, that row’d along, 
The list’ning winds receiv’d this song. 

What should we do but sing his praise 
That led us through the wat’ry maze 
Unto an isle so long unknown, 
And yet far kinder than our own? 
Where he the huge sea-monsters wracks, 
That lift the deep upon their backs, 
He lands us on a grassy stage, 
Safe from the storm’s and prelates’ rage. 
He gave us this eternal spring 
Which here enamels everything, 
And sends the fowls to us in care, 
On daily visits through the air. 
He hangs in shades the orange bright, 
Like golden lamps in a green night; 
And does in the pomegranates close 
Jewels more rich than Ormus shows. 
He makes the figs our mouths to meet 
And throws the melons at our feet, 
But apples plants of such a price, 
No tree could ever bear them twice. 
With cedars, chosen by his hand, 
From Lebanon, he stores the land, 
And makes the hollow seas that roar 
Proclaim the ambergris on shore. 
He cast (of which we rather boast) 
The Gospel’s pearl upon our coast, 
And in these rocks for us did frame 
A temple, where to sound his name. 
Oh let our voice his praise exalt, 
Till it arrive at heaven’s vault; 
Which thence (perhaps) rebounding, may 
Echo beyond the Mexic Bay. 

Thus sung they in the English boat 
An holy and a cheerful note, 
And all the way, to guide their chime, 
With falling oars they kept the time.


iambic tetrameter
Had we but world enough and time, 
This coyness, lady, were no crime. 
We would sit down, and think which way 
To walk, and pass our long love’s day. 
Thou by the Indian Ganges’ side 
Shouldst rubies find; I by the tide 
Of Humber would complain. I would 
Love you ten years before the flood, 
And you should, if you please, refuse 
Till the conversion of the Jews. 
My vegetable love should grow 
Vaster than empires and more slow; 
An hundred years should go to praise 
Thine eyes, and on thy forehead gaze; 
Two hundred to adore each breast, 
But thirty thousand to the rest; 
An age at least to every part, 
And the last age should show your heart. 
For, lady, you deserve this state, 
Nor would I love at lower rate. 
       But at my back I always hear 
Time’s wingèd chariot hurrying near; 
And yonder all before us lie 
Deserts of vast eternity. 
Thy beauty shall no more be found; 
Nor, in thy marble vault, shall sound 
My echoing song; then worms shall try 
That long-preserved virginity, 
And your quaint honour turn to dust, 
And into ashes all my lust; 
The grave’s a fine and private place, 
But none, I think, do there embrace. 
       Now therefore, while the youthful hue 
Sits on thy skin like morning dew, 
And while thy willing soul transpires 
At every pore with instant fires, 
Now let us sport us while we may, 
And now, like amorous birds of prey, 
Rather at once our time devour 
Than languish in his slow-chapped power. 
Let us roll all our strength and all 
Our sweetness up into one ball, 
And tear our pleasures with rough strife 
Through the iron gates of life: 
Thus, though we cannot make our sun 
Stand still, yet we will make him run.


iambic pentameter
As some brave admiral, in former war 
   Deprived of force, but pressed with courage still, 
Two rival fleets appearing from afar, 
   Crawls to the top of an adjacent hill; 

From whence, with thoughts full of concern, he views 
   The wise and daring conduct of the fight, 
Whilst each bold action to his mind renews 
   His present glory and his past delight; 

From his fierce eyes flashes of fire he throws, 
   As from black clouds when lightning breaks away; 
Transported, thinks himself amidst the foes, 
   And absent, yet enjoys the bloody day; 

So, when my days of impotence approach, 
   And I’m by pox and wine’s unlucky chance 
Forced from the pleasing billows of debauch 
   On the dull shore of lazy temperance, 

My pains at least some respite shall afford 
   While I behold the battles you maintain 
When fleets of glasses sail about the board, 
   From whose broadsides volleys of wit shall rain. 

Nor let the sight of honorable scars, 
   Which my too forward valor did procure, 
Frighten new-listed soldiers from the wars: 
   Past joys have more than paid what I endure. 

Should any youth (worth being drunk) prove nice, 
   And from his fair inviter meanly shrink, 
’Twill please the ghost of my departed vice 
   If, at my counsel, he repent and drink. 

Or should some cold-complexioned sot forbid, 
   With his dull morals, our bold night-alarms, 
I’ll fire his blood by telling what I did 
   When I was strong and able to bear arms. 

I’ll tell of whores attacked, their lords at home; 
   Bawds’ quarters beaten up, and fortress won; 
Windows demolished, watches overcome; 
   And handsome ills by my contrivance done. 

Nor shall our love-fits, Chloris, be forgot, 
   When each the well-looked linkboy strove t’ enjoy, 
And the best kiss was the deciding lot 
   Whether the boy fucked you, or I the boy. 

With tales like these I will such thoughts inspire 
   As to important mischief shall incline: 
I’ll make him long some ancient church to fire, 
   And fear no lewdness he’s called to by wine. 

Thus, statesmanlike, I’ll saucily impose, 
   And safe from action, valiantly advise; 
Sheltered in impotence, urge you to blows, 
   And being good for nothing else, be wise.


iambic tetrameter
I cannot change, as others do, 
Though you unjustly scorn; 
Since that poor swain, that sighs for you 
For you alone was born. 
No, Phyllis, no, your heart to move 
A surer way I’ll try: 
And to revenge my slighted love, 
Will still love on, will still love on, and die. 

When, kill’d with grief, Amyntas lies; 
And you to mind shall call 
The sighs that now unpitied rise; 
The tears that vainly fall: 
That welcome hour that ends this smart, 
Will then begin your pain; 
For such a faithful, tender heart 
Can never break, can never break in vain.


iambic tetrameter
O what can ail thee, knight-at-arms, 
       Alone and palely loitering? 
The sedge has withered from the lake, 
       And no birds sing. 

O what can ail thee, knight-at-arms, 
       So haggard and so woe-begone? 
The squirrel’s granary is full, 
       And the harvest’s done. 

I see a lily on thy brow, 
       With anguish moist and fever-dew, 
And on thy cheeks a fading rose 
       Fast withereth too. 

I met a lady in the meads, 
       Full beautiful—a faery’s child, 
Her hair was long, her foot was light, 
       And her eyes were wild. 

I made a garland for her head, 
       And bracelets too, and fragrant zone; 
She looked at me as she did love, 
       And made sweet moan 

I set her on my pacing steed, 
       And nothing else saw all day long, 
For sidelong would she bend, and sing 
       A faery’s song. 

She found me roots of relish sweet, 
       And honey wild, and manna-dew, 
And sure in language strange she said— 
       ‘I love thee true’. 

She took me to her Elfin grot, 
       And there she wept and sighed full sore, 
And there I shut her wild wild eyes 
       With kisses four. 

And there she lullèd me asleep, 
       And there I dreamed—Ah! woe betide!— 
The latest dream I ever dreamt 
       On the cold hill side. 

I saw pale kings and princes too, 
       Pale warriors, death-pale were they all; 
They cried—‘La Belle Dame sans Merci 
       Thee hath in thrall!’ 

I saw their starved lips in the gloam, 
       With horrid warning gapèd wide, 
And I awoke and found me here, 
       On the cold hill’s side. 

And this is why I sojourn here, 
       Alone and palely loitering, 
Though the sedge is withered from the lake, 
       And no birds sing.


iambic pentameter
The day is gone, and all its sweets are gone! 
Sweet voice, sweet lips, soft hand, and softer breast, 
Warm breath, light whisper, tender semi-tone, 
Bright eyes, accomplish’d shape, and lang’rous waist! 
Faded the flower and all its budded charms, 
Faded the sight of beauty from my eyes, 
Faded the shape of beauty from my arms, 
Faded the voice, warmth, whiteness, paradise – 
Vanish’d unseasonably at shut of eve, 
When the dusk holiday – or holinight 
Of fragrant-curtain’d love begins to weave 
The woof of darkness thick, for hid delight, 
But, as I’ve read love’s missal through to-day, 
He’ll let me sleep, seeing I fast and pray. 


iambic pentameter
Bright star, would I were stedfast as thou art— 
         Not in lone splendour hung aloft the night 
And watching, with eternal lids apart, 
         Like nature's patient, sleepless Eremite, 
The moving waters at their priestlike task 
         Of pure ablution round earth's human shores, 
Or gazing on the new soft-fallen mask 
         Of snow upon the mountains and the moors— 
No—yet still stedfast, still unchangeable, 
         Pillow'd upon my fair love's ripening breast, 
To feel for ever its soft fall and swell, 
         Awake for ever in a sweet unrest, 
Still, still to hear her tender-taken breath, 
And so live ever—or else swoon to death.


iambic pentameter
Huge vapours brood above the clifted shore, 
Night o'er the ocean settles, dark and mute, 
Save where is heard the repercussive roar 
Of drowsy billows, on the rugged foot 
Of rocks remote; or still more distant tone 
Of seamen, in the anchored bark, that tell 
The watch relieved; or one deep voice alone, 
Singing the hour, and bidding "strike the bell." 
All is black shadow, but the lucid line 
Marked by the light surf on the level sand, 
Or where afar, the ship-lights faintly shine 
Like wandering fairy fires, that oft on land 
Mislead the pilgrim; such the dubious ray 
That wavering reason lends, in life's long darkling way. 


iambic pentameter
So many years have passed, 
Since, on my native hills, I learned to gaze 
On these delightful landscapes; and those years 
Have taught me so much sorrow, that my soul 
Feels not the joy reviving Nature brings; 
But, in dark retrospect, dejected dwells 
On human follies, and on human woes.— 
What is the promise of the infant year, 
The lively verdure, or the bursting blooms, 
To those, who shrink from horrors such as War 
Spreads o’er the affrighted world? With swimming eye, 
Back on the past they throw their mournful looks, 
And see the Temple, which they fondly hoped 
Reason would raise to Liberty, destroyed 
By ruffian hands; while, on the ruined mass, 
Flushed with hot blood, the Fiend of Discord sits 
In savage triumph; mocking every plea 
Of policy and justice, as she shows 
The headless corse of one, whose only crime 
Was being born a Monarch—Mercy turns, 
From spectacle so dire, her swollen eyes; 
And Liberty, with calm, unruffled brow 
Magnanimous, as conscious of her strength 
In Reason’s panoply, scorns to distain 
Her righteous cause with carnage, and resigns 
To Fraud and Anarchy the infuriate crowd.— 
What is the promise of the infant year 
To those, who (while the poor but peaceful hind 
Pens, unmolested, the increasing flock 
Of his rich master in this sea-fenced isle) 
Survey, in neighboring countries, scenes that make 
The sick heart shudder; and the man, who thinks, 
Blush for his species? There the trumpet’s voice 
Drowns the soft warbling of the woodland choir; 
And violets, lurking in their turfy beds 
Beneath the flowering thorn, are stained with blood. 
There fall, at once, the spoiler and the spoiled; 
While War, wide-ravaging, annihilates 
The hope of cultivation; gives to Fiends, 
The meager, ghastly Fiends of Want and Woe, 
The blasted land—There, taunting in the van 
Of vengeance-breathing armies, Insult stalks; 
And, in the ranks, 'Famine, and Sword, and Fire, 
Crouch for employment.'


iambic pentameter
On thy stupendous summit, rock sublime! 
That o’er the channel reared, half way at sea 
The mariner at early morning hails, 
I would recline; while Fancy should go forth, 
And represent the strange and awful hour 
Of vast concussion; when the Omnipotent 
Stretched forth his arm, and rent the solid hills, 
Bidding the impetuous main flood rush between 
The rifted shores, and from the continent 
Eternally divided this green isle. 
Imperial lord of the high southern coast! 
From thy projecting head-land I would mark 
Far in the east the shades of night disperse, 
Melting and thinned, as from the dark blue wave 
Emerging, brilliant rays of arrowy light 
Dart from the horizon; when the glorious sun 
Just lifts above it his resplendent orb. 
Advances now, with feathery silver touched, 
The rippling tide of flood; glisten the sands, 
While, inmates of the chalky clefts that scar 
Thy sides precipitous, with shrill harsh cry, 
Their white wings glancing in the level beam, 
The terns, and gulls, and tarrocks, seek their food, 
And thy rough hollows echo to the voice 
Of the gray choughs, and ever restless daws, 
With clamor, not unlike the chiding hounds, 
While the lone shepherd, and his baying dog, 
Drive to thy turfy crest his bleating flock. 

The high meridian of the day is past, 
And Ocean now, reflecting the calm Heaven, 
Is of cerulean hue; and murmurs low 
The tide of ebb, upon the level sands. 
The sloop, her angular canvas shifting still, 
Catches the light and variable airs 
That but a little crisp the summer sea, 
Dimpling its tranquil surface. 